Now let's drop some hard truths
about engineering management.
These are, I guess, common myths, and
we covered some of that in motivations
on what people are driven by.
But I wanna tell you the really honest
truth about engineering management.
The truth about engineering management
is you will become less technical.
`so I keep talking about it, but
it's really important as you make this
transition from software engineer
to engineering management,
you become less well-versed
in the goings-ons of things.
You probably don't get into technology
debates anymore because you're further
away from it.
And it's something you have to accept.
If you try to hold on closely to the code
and try to be as technical and try to be
like, yeah, I'm familiar with this piece
of code, let me show you my perspective.
Or let me try to slip in this PR real
quick cuz I think I know the fix,
it just becomes a worse and worse idea.
And the further on you go into engineering
management, the less technical you become
in terms of the day to day, it's something
you have to accept, it's hard to do.
It was hard for me to do because I built
my entire persona as being a software
engineer, a really good software engineer.
And now all of a sudden,
I'm not, but I am.
I'm still involved, I'm not technical,
I don't know the nuances.
I couldn't tell you the difference
between React 16 and
React 18, which, you're like, Jim,
you write front-end software?
You did front-end and you don't know that?
I'm like, no, I don't.
I could find out, but mostly I'm
gonna lean on my team to do that,
I know how to ask the right questions.
But in general, I'd say you
become less technical over time.
Another truth is micromanaging is easy,
trust is hard.
If you run a micromanager, Is it fun?
No, it's not fun.
But I'd say micromanagement is the biggest
anti-pattern of being a manager.
Because as a manager,
as we've talked about,
you don't feel like you're doing anything.
It takes a long time to actually see like,
I am doing something,
I'm impacting in this way.
So being a micromanager gives that
feeling of you doing something.
Like I'm doing something, I told you
to close that book, and I told you how
to write that code, and If I told you hey,
you should upgrade this library.
And become a real micromanager cuz
you wanna hold on to things and
make it feel like you're doing something.
But the reality is micromanagement
is where a lot of people start,
it's where a lot of people never
get out of, they never let go.
And you're just not effective
being a micromanager.
Cuz if you're focused on the day-to-day,
who's focusing on the week-to-week,
the quarter-to-quarter, that's your job.
But if you're down there in
the weeds with your team,
trying to point out things, one,
you don't trust them, it's obvious.
Micromanagement means you don't
trust the people you have,
which maybe that's accurate, maybe they
actually need some performance coaching.
But that's a conversation you should have,
but
a lot of people avoid that by
micromanaging, by doing things for people.
Trusting is hard, but
you have to trust your team.
You have to trust the team
that they're smarter than you,
they're better at coding than you are,
they're more technical,
they know more of the nuances of
the day-to-day, but it's so hard to do.
It's really hard to do, and
I cannot stress how difficult
it is to just step back and let things
happen and not try to interject yourself.
Another truth about
engineering management,
no one tells you how to spend your time,
This is a hard one.
It's a hard one for me even today,
trying to figure out where
I should spend my time.
I'd say definitely in the first
year one of the biggest,
hardest things to deal with was
what should I be doing right now?
There's a lot of things you can
be doing at any given time.
I could be project planning.
I could be looking at, hey,
what's our plan for next year?
I chould be looking at growth plans for
everybody on the team.
I could be building rapport with my
partners, looking at their roadmaps.
I can be talking to my manager,
figuring out hey, is our priorities right?
I could be thinking about parties,
thinking about swag for the team.
Thinking about team meetings,
how they're run, are they effective?
Thinking about icebreakers,
we talked earlier about
finding the right icebreaker.
Thinking about team dynamics.
I won't go into all the things I
could be doing, but there are dozens,
maybe hundreds of things I could
be doing at any given moment.
And no one's gonna tell you if this is the
right thing to focus on in the moment or
not, and
it's something I struggle with sometimes.
And this is hard, this is really hard,
it doesn't sound like it.
But at the end of the day,
what most people want in life is for
someone to tell them what to do.
They do it, they check it off, and
they move on to something else,
cuz it's satisfying, it's easy.
But that check box doesn't exist
as an engineering manager.
There's no you should do this, do this, do
this, do this, and then your team is good,
because every team is
going to be different.
Maybe they're executing well.
Maybe their social dynamics
need a lot of work.
They're all really smart people,
but they don't talk to each other.
That's something no one else can
tell you other than you, and
no one will tell you here's
the right thing to do that.
So this is the truth of
engineering management,
is no one's gonna tell you that.
Cuz you're the only person in the entire
world that cares about your team.
And that's not saying your manager
doesn't care about the team, etc., and
they don't care about each other.
But your job literally is to care for your
team and to pay attention to them, and
no one else does that better
than you cuz that's your job.
So what does it take to manage
your team and take care of them,
make sure they're all functioning?
I don't know, you have to figure that out,
and that's really hard.
And that's that's the truth
of engineering management.
And no one will tell you what to do.
Like I said,
there's a lot of things you could do.
And I can I can go to my manager and
say like, I have all these problems,
these people are arguing.
And they might be able to
provide some insight, but
they're not gonna tell me what to do,
and that's a pro and a con.
They don't tell me what to do,
nobody tells you how to spend your time.
And they seem like similar things,
but they are different.
Cuz there's a lot of things to do, there's
a lot of things to spend your time on.
And your allocation of time varies,
there are hard things you're
always going to spend time doing.
One-on-ones, how much time
should you spend on that?
I don't know, depends on your team.
How much time should you
spend project planning?
I don't know, depends on your team.
What should you be doing next?
So for me personally,
I'm thinking about next year's planning,
how much time should I invest in that?
No one has that answer other than me.
So it's really why I spend so much time on
the truth of engineering management and
motivations, is you have to
really believe in yourself and
you can't second guess yourself.
Otherwise you will get nowhere, and you're
gonna spin out and you'll get nowhere.
And this is really challenging,
there is no checkbox of what to do.
And all that leads into
leadership is lonely.
You've all heard the phrase heavy
is the head that wears the crown,
familiar with that phrase?
Being in charge is a responsibility.
I've heard it referred to as
the lodestone of leadership,
you carry around this weight on your neck,
it's true, it's true.
I'm always thinking of, how's my team
doing, are they functioning well?
Is there anything I can be doing better
to help them overcome some hurdles,
some gaps?
And doing all that is so lonely,
cuz no one else knows other than me.
And I really can't emphasize
how lonely leadership is.
And the higher up you go, the more
it becomes, the lonelier it becomes,
and that's the truth.
So I'm not saying give your manager a hug,
but maybe give them a hug,
empathize with them.
I think knowing this has made me
a better manager to my director.
So I'm like, hey, how are you doing today?
Blah, blah, blah,
there's this blah, blah, blah.
I'm like, yeah, but how are you doing?
That means a lot to managers,
cuz no one asks that.
Your team is, again I'll use the parent
analogy, my kids are never like,
how are you doing today, Jim?
I've got a three-year-old and
one-year-old,
they don't care how I'm doing.
They care about is their stuff ready,
is there food, can they watch TV,
are their toys in the right place?
But they don't care about me personally,
and I don't take that personally either,
it's just human nature.
But that's kind of how a lot of software
engineers treat their manager too.
It's like they don't care about them as a
person, they're just a thing, a role, and
that's lonely.
It's a lonely job, but that's part of it,
you just have to accept that.
How to make this better is
you have peer managers, and
you talk to them cuz they're
going through the same thing.
And while you may not know the nuances
of their team, cuz every personalities
are different, you can at least like,
yeah, yeah, I know, man, I know.
A lot of what we do in one-on-ones
with other managers is just complain.
[LAUGH] I mean it, cuz there's no one to
complain to about some of these problems,
you don't wanna do it with your team.
But just like you complain as software
engineers, managers complain,
directors complain, everybody complaint.
My personal philosophy is I believe
in the power of venting and
just getting it all out, and
then I feel better about it.
Everybody has their own
way of dealing with it.
But that's a lot of what
managers do in one-on-ones.
It's just like, man,
they changed the scope,
did you hear about this new
thing you're dealing with.
And I won't go into all
the various specifics.
But yeah, it's a lonely job.
Question.
>> Chad says they have a hybrid
engineering management and technical role.
And he's a little scared to
move fully into management and
lose the technical skill that he's
built over the last eight years.
>> Yeah,
that's just the truth of it, though.
There's an old question I didn't
call out specifically but
I definitely talk about it,
is should managers code?
And this is more of a contentious debate,
but I say no.
If I'm coding, I'm not focused on
the people in the bigger picture,
I'm more focused on the nuances and
the specifics.
And some people do code as a manager.
A lot of roles you are expected
to code and that's fine,
I just don't recommend it.
I think there's better ways to spend
your time that are more effective.
But every company is different, especially
at a smaller company where you're expected
to do a lot more and wear a lot more hats
you're probably coding a little bit.
At a bigger company where I
have dozens of customers,
I think my team supports 24, 25 teams,
and I have 5, 6 partners who I work with.
If I'm coding, I can't possibly know
all these other things going on.
So yeah, you will become less technical,
you should if you're doing things right,
and that's just something
you have to accept.
And that to me was hard, as my identity
of software engineer was writing code.
And you just have to let that go, and
that's a hard lesson I had to learn.
>> Jim, one thing I was thinking about
too is that you can always go back to,
we've definitely seen people
move into management and
then go back to being an engineer.
So it's not like it's completely lost,
it is something possible.
And you've also built up some unique
skill sets as being a manager and it can,
to earlier points you've
made in your presentation,
is that you can actually be even
a stronger engineer because of it.
So someone wanting to give up the
technical skills, it's not fully given up,
you're still able to go back.
>> Yeah, good point, Ryan.
Yeah, you can always go back,
the longer you go, though,
the harder it is to go back.
It is like riding a bike though,
you'll pick it up,
but it's not gonna be as
natural as it is today.
And that said, there are people, rare
people in the world, exceptional people,
who are good at people leadership and
technical side.
I think one example that comes
to mind is Sarah Drasner.
I don't know if you all are familiar
with Sarah, exceptional human being, but
she's very good at coding and
very good at people leadership.
But most people do not
have that capability, so
it's something you just have
to accept a little bit.
But you can go back, it's just it's
gonna be harder and harder over time.
>> No, just who is that,
that sounds very familiar.
>> Sarah Drasner, I believe she's a-
>> Director of engineering at Google,
she's in charge of Angular, and
something else now too I think.
>> Yeah, Angular View.
>> Just transition into like web and
Android-
>> Yeah.
>> She was a teacher on Front-End Masters
teaching about SVG and all sorts of stuff.
>> Yeah.
[INAUDIBLE]
>> She's someone I learned from just
in passing.
Whenever I talked to her, I learned
something new about people leadership,
which says a lot about her.
But generally, it's really hard to balance
these very different parts of your brain
that takes dealing with people and
tactical leadership.